---
title: Faults and Strengths of Public Prayer
---

*Abridged from Ligon Duncan’s “32 Principles for Public Prayer”*
## Frequent Faults in Public Prayer
1. Overuse of certain favorite words and set forms of expression. This can become monotonous if one leads in pastoral prayer week after week. Too much repetition of God’s name (“Lord,” “Father,” “Heavenly Father,” etc.) should also be diligently avoided. This is often simply a matter of habit and lack of forethought.
2. A lack of order and certain important elements of prayer. Disorderliness is a distraction for people who are trying to pray along with the one leading in prayer. 
3. Too much detail in particular elements of prayer. We should aim for proportion between the various parts of the prayer.
4. Lack of a sense of occasion. Some prayers so disregard the circumstances of the service, that they are virtually generic and would be as suitable for one occasion as well as another. Public prayer ought to be fitted for and appropriate to the circumstances of the service in which it is rendered.
5. Lack of reverence in the conclusion of prayer. Often the sentences or words of a prayer are spoken in such a way which gives the impression that the one praying is more concerned about what he must do following the prayer than he is with reverently addressing the Almighty. Our conclusions to prayer should be as worshipful as our beginnings.
## Characteristics of a Good Public Prayer
1. Public prayer should abound in the language of Scripture.  This is “one of the most essential excellencies in public prayer,” said Miller. The language of the word of God is always right, safe, and edifying. Furthermore, in God’s word there is a simplicity and tenderness which is very powerful and particularly suited to captivate the heart. Finally, it enables the listener to follow the prayer more easily.
2. Public prayer should be well-ordered. Regular order is helpful to the memory of the one who is leading in prayer and assists the worshippers who are joining in it. Furthermore, it helps keep the prayer at a proper length. Of course, this does not mean that the same order must be used every time.
3. It should be general and comprehensive. Miller observes that “a suitable prayer in the public assembly is dignified and general in its plan, and comprehensive in its requests, without descending to too much detail.” This will better suit the prayer to the general petitions that need to be rendered up by the congregation as a whole.
4. It should not be too wordy or lengthy. This will involve care not to attempt to pray on too many topics, or in too great detail.
5. It should be appropriate to the occasion on which it is offered. This is a Scriptural pattern, a help to the worshippers, and a good way to keep pastoral prayers from becoming too tedious or lengthy.
6. It ought to contain a good dose of gospel truth. Without turning into a sermon, Miller suggests that “It is an important excellence in a public prayer that it include the recognition of so much gospel truth as to be richly in instructive to all who join in it, as well as who listen to it.”
7. It should manifest variety. There is so much that is suitable for inclusion in the petitions of corporate prayer in the Lord’s church, that only laziness can lead us to pray over the same content, in the same pattern, week after week. A desirable degree of variety in prayer can be a great help to holding the attention of those worshippers who are seriously attempting to join in offering prayer to God.
8. It should contain petition for the advance of the gospel. Miller says “a good public prayer ought always to include a strongly marked reference to the spread of the gospel, and earnest petitions for the success of the means employed by the Church for that purpose.”
9. It should be marked by the spirit and language of hope and confidence. “Our gracious covenant God loves to be taken at his word; to be firmly and affectionately trusted; to have his exceeding great and precious promises importunately pleaded; and to be approached as a willing, tender Father, not only ‘mighty to save,’ but ready and willing to save; more ready to bestow the gifts of his grace than earthly parents to give good things to their children” said Miller.
10. The voice and tone in which we offer prayer should be suitable to the solemn activity. “It is important to add, that the whole manner of uttering a public prayer should be in accordance with the humble, filial, affectionate, yet reverential spirit which ought to characterize the prayer itself throughout,” said Miller. For a sinner to offer a prayer to Almighty God in a “pompous, dictatorial manner” is incongruous with our status as sinful men and the very activity of prayer (which is an acknowledgment of our creaturely dependence and an exercise of humble reliance).

In conclusion, we may note Stephen Miller’s pithy description of an acceptable public prayer. He said “Words ‘few,’ ‘well considered,’ and ‘well ordered,’ are the inspired characteristics of a good prayer.”